a) Package Managers
What is a package manager?

A package manager is a tool that helps us download, install, update, and remove libraries (packages) that our project needs.

In backend development, instead of writing everything from scratch, we use ready-made packages for things like servers, databases, security, etc.

Simple example:

If you want to create a server, you can install the express package instead of writing all server code yourself.

Why do we need package managers in backend development?

To save time by using existing libraries.

To manage project dependencies easily.

To keep versions under control so the app works the same on every computer.

To update packages safely when new features or bug fixes are released.

Problems if package managers are not used

You must manually download and copy files for every library.

Version mismatch: one developer may use a different version than another.

Hard to update or remove libraries.

More chances of errors and broken projects.

b) NPM (Node Package Manager)
What is NPM?

NPM is the default package manager for Node.js. It helps us install and manage third-party packages for our backend applications.

Example:

npm install express

This command downloads Express and adds it to your project.

Why is NPM important for Node.js applications?

It gives access to thousands of ready-made packages.

Automatically manages dependencies.

Makes project setup fast and simple.

Helps teams work on the same project without version problems.

How NPM helps in managing dependencies

When you install a package, NPM:

Adds it to package.json

Downloads it into node_modules

Records exact versions in package-lock.json

When another developer runs npm install, NPM installs the same versions, ensuring the project works the same everywhere.

c) Backend Project Initialization
Command to initialize a Node.js project
npm init

This command creates a new Node.js project.

Difference between npm init and npm init -y
npm init

Asks questions like:

Project name

Version

Description

Author

Creates package.json based on your answers.

npm init -y

Automatically creates package.json with default values.

Faster when you don’t want to answer questions.

d) Files and Folders After Project Initialization
1) package.json

Purpose:

Main configuration file of the project.

Stores:

Project name and version

Scripts (like start, dev)

List of dependencies

Why it is important:

Tells NPM what packages your project needs.

Makes it easy for others to install the same setup.

2) node_modules

Purpose:

Contains all installed packages and their code.

Why it is important:

Your application uses these files to run.

Why it should NOT be pushed to GitHub:

Very large in size.

Can be recreated anytime using:

npm install

Storing it in GitHub makes the repository heavy and slow.

3) package-lock.json

Purpose:

Stores the exact versions of installed packages.

Ensures the same dependency tree for every developer.

Why it is important:

Prevents “works on my system” problems.

Keeps the project stable across different machines
node_modules/

Reason: Can be regenerated, very large.
package.json

So others know which dependencies are required.

package-lock.json

So exact versions are installed everywhere.

Your project files (app.js, routes, controllers, etc.)